## i18n

Pilot.js supports internationalized (i18n) routing, allowing you to easily localize your app and support multiple languages. [This follows the same rules as Next.js](https://nextjs.org/docs/advanced-features/i18n-routing#limits-for-the-i18n-config).

### Getting started

To get started, you need to add the `i18n` key to your `pilot.config.js` file. This key accepts an object with the following properties:

- `locales`: An array of locale strings. This is required.
- `defaultLocale`: The default locale. This is optional and defaults to the first locale in the `locales` array.

```js
module.exports = {
	i18n: {
		locales: ['en-US', 'es'],
		defaultLocale: 'en-US',
	}
}
```

If you've already defined an `i18n` key in your `next.config.js` file, Pilot.js will use that. When the `i18n` key is defined in both files, the `pilot.config.js` key will take precedence.

### Usage

The Pilot.js router will automatically add the locale to the path of your pages. For example, if you have a page at `pages/index.js`, the path will be `/en-US/` for the `en-US` locale and `/es/` for the `es` locale. This is invisible to the user in a native app, but it's important to know how it works.

> **Note:** Loading the translations is left to you. You can use a library like [i18next](https://www.i18next.com/) or [react-intl](https://formatjs.io/docs/react-intl/). You can also use the `useTranslation` hook from [react-i18next](https://react.i18next.com/).

### next-i18next

If you're using [next-i18next](https://github.com/i18next/next-i18next) to load your translations, you'll be happy to know that Pilot.js comes with a built-in integration for it. A common problem with React Native apps is that they don't have access to certain Node APIs such as `fs`. This is a problem for `next-i18next` because it uses `fs` to load the translations. You can solve this by using web props or by using the built-in integration.

#### Using web props

First you'll need to [enable the web props feature](/docs/web-props.md). Once you've done that, you can continue with the following steps:

1. Install `next-i18next`, `i18next`, and `react-i18next`:

```bash
npm install next-i18next i18next react-i18next
```

2. Create a `pilot-i18next.js` and `pilot-i18next.native.js` file in your project. The Metro bundler will automatically use the `.native` file when building for React Native.

3. Add the following code to `pilot-i18next.js`:

```js
export * from '@waveplay/pilot/i18n.web.js'
```

4. Add the following code to `pilot-i18next.native.js`:

```js
export * from '@waveplay/pilot/i18n.native.js'
```

5. Follow the [next-i18next setup instructions](https://github.com/i18next/next-i18next) but import `serverSideTranslations` from your `pilot-i18next` file instead of `next-i18next`.

#### Using the native runtime

If you don't want to use web props, you can use the native runtime. This is a bit more complicated, but it's worth it if you can't use web props.

Follow the steps for web props above, in addition to these:

6. Import `appWithTranslation` from `pilot-i18next` when wrapping your `_app` page.

```js
import { appWithTranslation } from './pilot-i18next'

const MyApp = ({ Component, pageProps }) => {
	return <Component {...pageProps} />
}
export default appWithTranslation(MyApp)
```

7. Run `pilot sync:locales` to copy the translations to your app's assets folder and generate runtime imports, then restart your app.

```bash
pilot sync:locales
```
